well Egypt has been stepping up its
number of checkpoints along its border
with Gaza that satellite images are
revealing this now in November
construction Crews began working on a
raised strip of land some 200 meters
away from the fence dividing Egypt from
the Gaza Strip it's now 3.5 km long that
brings the total length of the earth
barrier to some 14 km we understand
Egypt is also building a new concrete
wall along the old border wall well
Israel's advance to the south of Gaza
has been raising tensions with Egypt the
two countries signed a formal peace
treaty back in 1979 based on What's
called the Camp David Accords it lays
out a complicated set of agreements
about land and borders now importantly
it limits the presence of Egypt's
military in the Sinai Peninsula a
separate agreement was also then signed
in 2005 after Israeli soldiers and
settlers withdrew from the Gaza Strip
and that covered how the rougher border
crossing was to be run as well as how
Egypt could deploy guards along that
border but Israel is now talking about
relocating huge numbers of Palestinians
away from Rafa Egypt has warned that any
attempt to move move people across the
border could lead to the termination of
the treaty and the other agreements too
between the two countries well let's not
bring in maub he's the director of the G
studies Center and a professor of Middle
East politics at katar University ma
always great to have you as we've been
reporting Egypt has been clear that any
forced Mass displacement of people from
Gaza is a red line for them we see there
already fortifying the Border area what
does that red line mean to Cairo what
kind of action could we
see you know since um November there was
a different messages coming from Cairo
about the situation in Gaza and the the
the most important me two messages one
no displacement people will not be
allowed to go to SAA and the other the
other important message um there will be
no um military operation on what
so-called Philadelphia uh uh cross
border with with Egypt and the security
of that U basically area will be under
the Egyptians and those two messages
basically were uh obvious between both
sides what was interesting the the
hidden messages where basically um
Israel was accusing um Egypt of being
responsible of the you know or
problematic issue on the rafos border
where Egyptian now claim that the
problem in in is Israel so there is a a
war a war between both sides but when it
comes to the um uh Philadelphia and when
it comes to the uh um procedures that
Egyptians are following it's obvious
that they don't want to have any
Palestinian going to SAA so far well if
that red line is crossed what could we
see happen
Mau um in the last uh 24 hours the red
line was if if any Israelis pushed
towards that the the whole peace treaty
will be basically put on hold um the the
the news came from the Israeli side the
Egyptians basically kept silent but um
to be honest um I think maybe this is
this is a way to uh test the water if
this happens I think uh when it comes
from Channel 13 of Israel that was I
call it a test of what how the Egyptian
will will response to that um I'm not
sure so far that the Egyptians has
responded serious seriously about what
happened in Gaza whether when it comes
to the humanitarian Aid or when it comes
to the politic to the politics to the
humanitarian a they are not doing enough
to push more more more uh Aid to come
into Gaza uh there is a a bureaucracy on
their borders that is um even by the uh
United Nations been acknowledging that
and saying you know the Egyptians should
do more um and that's not to blame only
the Israelis so I think the Egyptians
they try to check two things one what is
the American Position will be and how
far the Americans can pressure Netanyahu
and the second element is how much Arabs
and and other nations Europeans and the
EU for in particular can pressure
Israelis I think the Egyptians they keep
eye on those two main factors and see
how much they can pressure Netanyahu I'm
not sure the Egyptian can really really
play a major role on stopping rafah
military operation that the Israelis
want to do I'm not sure they would be
able to stop it
they need uh some support
internationally from the United States
from the United Nation from the
Europeans otherwise alone I'm not I'm
not sure they can do it well I've been
wondering about the White House response
here because we know that Egypt has
close economic and Military ties with
the US where is Washington on this
they've been saying for some time they
won't accept the force displacement of
people from Gaza but what does that
actually mean in
practice in according to the Washington
Post just uh in the last uh 20 25
minutes I was was reading they say we
have no impact in secret or in public on
Netanyahu we have no impact and we are
missing that momentum and that is uh
that is the assessment of people close
to piden who now they push him to
criticize Biden to criticize Nan in
public so basically there is a serious
need to Biden to be more Brave and
basically cross the red lines he puts
for himself from day one when he and his
administration accepted the Israeli
narrative and followed following that
narrative they need to reach the point
that that narrative has not offered him
offer Biden any actually help in his in
the elections and he needs now to cross
that line and decide about how to
pressure the Israelis so he can win the
vote of the young people in the United
States if he wants to remain um he wants
to remain in in the in in the White
House well ma let me ask you about these
protests that we've also been seeing at
Karam Abu salum do you think they could
impact the aid relationship that the
role that Egypt is playing you were
talking earlier about that war of words
over who's actually stopping aid from
getting into
Gaza those demonstration as are a
reflection of the division which
Netanyahu government has created between
the families of captives and the
families of the soldiers so those are
the family of the soldier and Netanyahu
government they want to say that we have
uh uh an active society which basically
still in favor of the war and they in
favor of actually not allowing uh
humanitarian Aid to get into Gaza so
it's a reflection it's a political game
thaty is playing to basically divide and
roll and one of the signs of that is
what happened in the K abam basically
crossb boards Maj they're speaking to us
from katar University at a professor of
Middle Eastern politics always great to
get your thoughts thank you for joining
us again Mau thank you thank you thank
you